# Universal Wayland Session Manager

This is an experiment in creating a versatile tool for launching
any standalone Wayland WM with environment management and systemd integration.

WIP. Use at your onw risk. Breaking changes are being introduced. See commit messages.

## Concepts and features

- Can select from `wayland-sessions` desktop entries
- Can run with any provided WM command line
- WM-specific behavior can be added by plugins
    - currently supported: sway, wayfire, labwc
- Maximum use of systemd units and dependencies for startup, operation, and shutdown
- Systemd units are treated with hierarchy and universality in mind:
    - use specifiers
    - named from common to specific: `wayland-${category}@${wm}.${unit_type}`
    - allow for high-level `name-.d` drop-ins
- Idempotently (well, best-effort-idempotently) handle environment:
    - On startup environment is prepared by:
        - sourcing shell profile
        - sourcing common `wayland-session-env` files (from $XDG_CONFIG_DIRS, $XDG_CONFIG_HOME)
        - sourcing `wayland-session-${wm}-env` files (from $XDG_CONFIG_DIRS, $XDG_CONFIG_HOME)
    - Difference between inital state and prepared environment is exported into systemd user manager
    - On shutdown variables that were exported are unset from systemd user manager
    - Lists of variables for export and cleanup are determined algorithmically by:
        - comparing environment before and after preparation procedures
        - boolean operations with predefined lists (tweakable by plugins)
- Better control of XDG autostart apps:
    - Propagate Stop from xdg-desktop-autostart.target via a drop-in
- Try best to shutdown session cleanly via more dependencies between units
- Written in POSIX shell (a smidgen of masochism went into this code)

## Installation

Put `wayland-session` script somewhere in `$PATH`.
Put `wayland-session-plugins` dir somewhere in `/lib:/usr/lib:/usr/local/lib:${HOME}/.local/lib`

Ensure your WM does this sequentially upon startup:

- exports `WAYLAND_DISPLAY` (and other potentially useful vars it sets) to systemd user manager
- runs `systemd-notify --ready` after that

Example snippet for sway:

    exec dbus-update-activation-environment --systemd \
    					SWAYSOCK \
    					DISPLAY \
    					I3SOCK \
    					WAYLAND_DISPLAY \
    					XCURSOR_SIZE \
    					XCURSOR_THEME \
    	&& systemctl --user import-environment \
    					SWAYSOCK \
    					DISPLAY \
    					I3SOCK \
    					WAYLAND_DISPLAY \
    					XCURSOR_SIZE \
    					XCURSOR_THEME \
    	&& systemd-notify --ready

## Slices

If your WM of choice is systemd-aware and supports launching apps explicitly scoped in app.slice,
or if you prefixed all app commands launched by WM with:

    systemd-run --user -qG --scope --slice=app.slice

then you can put WM in session.slice (as recommended by man systemd.special) by setting environment variable
`UWSM_USE_SESSION_SLICE=true` during `unitgen` phase. This will set `Slice=session.slice` for WM services.

Example snippet for sway on how to explicitly put apps in app.slice, scoped:

    set $scoper exec systemd-run --user -qG --scope --slice=app.slice
    bindsym --to-code $mod+t exec $scoper foot
    bindsym --to-code $mod+r exec $scoper rofi -show drun

## Full systemd service operation

### Short story:

Start with `wayland-session ${wm} start` (it will hold while wayland session is running).

`${wm}` argument is either a WM executable, or full literal command line with arguments, or one of special strings:

- `select`: Invokes a menu to select WM from desktop entries for wayland-sessions. Selection is saved, previous selection is highlighted.
- `default`: Runs previously selected WM, if selection was made, otherwise invokes a menu.

Stop with either `wayland-session ${wm} stop` or `systemctl --user stop "wayland-wm@*.service"`

### Longer story:

#### Start and bind

(At least for now) Units are generated by the script (and plugins).

Run `wayland-session ${wm} unitgen` to populate `${XDG_RUNTIME_DIR}` with them.

The first argument may also contain the full literal command line for the WM with arguments, i.e.:

`wayland-session "${wm} --some-arg \"quoted arg\"" unitgen`

In this case full WM commandline will be stored in a unit override file for specific WM.
This commandline should also be specified for `start` action as unit generation also happens there.
Needless to say, it should be compatible with unit `ExecStart=` attribute.

After units are generated, WM can be started by: `systemctl --user start wayland-wm@${wm}.service`

Add `--wait` to hold terminal until session ends.

`exec` it from login shell to bind to login session:

`exec systemctl --user start --wait wayland-wm@${wm}.service`

Still if login session is terminated, wayland session will continue running, most likely no longer accessible.

To also bind it the other way around, use traps:

`trap "if systemctl --user is-active -q wayland-wm@${WM}.service ; then systemctl --user --stop wayland-wm@${WM}.service ; fi" INT EXIT HUP TERM`

Then the end of login shell will also be the end of wayland session.

#### Stop

Wildcard `systemctl --user stop "wayland-wm@*.service"`.
If start command was run with `exec`, (i.e. from login shell on a tty or via `.profile`),
this stop command also doubles as a logout command.

`wayland-session` is smart enough to find login session associated with current TTY
and export `$XDG_SESSION_ID`, `$XDG_VTNR` to user manager environment using `wayland-wm-env@${WM}.service` bound to `graphical-session-pre.target`
(and later clean it up).
(I really do not know it this is a good idea, but since there can be only one graphical session
per user with systemd, seems like such).

#### Profile integration

This example starts sway wayland session automatically upon login on tty1 if system is in `graphical.target`

**Screening for being in interactive login shell here is essential**, since `wayland-wm-env@${WM}.service` sources profile which has a potential for nasty loops if run unconditionally.
Other conditions are a recommendation.

Short snippet for `~/.profile`:

    if [ "${0}" != "${0#-}" ] && [ "$XDG_VTNR" = "1" ] && systemctl is-active -q graphical.target
    then
        exec wayland-session select start
    fi

Extended snippet for `~/.profile`:

    MY_WM=sway
    if [ "${0}" != "${0#-}" -a "$XDG_VTNR" = "1" ] \
      && systemctl is-active -q graphical.target \
      && ! systemctl --user is-active -q wayland-wm@*.service
    then
        wayland-session ${MY_WM} unitgen
        trap "if systemctl --user is-active -q wayland-wm@${MY_WM}.service ; then systemctl --user --stop wayland-wm@${MY_WM}.service ; fi" INT EXIT HUP TERM
        echo Starting ${MY_WM} WM
        systemctl --user start --wait wayland-wm@${MY_WM}.service &
        wait
        exit
    fi

## WM-specific actions

Plugins provide WM-specific functions.
See `#### Load WM plugin` comment section in `wayland-session` for function descriptions
and `wayland-session-plugins/*.sh.in` for examples.

## TODO

- invent a better way to stop xdg-desktop-portal-gtk.service on WM stop
- since shell-start mode was dropped and the only mechanism that requires native shell is env loading contained to `wayland-wm-env@.service` invocations, maybe rewrite the whole thing in python

## Compliments

Inspired by and adapted some techniques from:

- [sway-services](https://github.com/xdbob/sway-services)
- [sway-systemd](https://github.com/alebastr/sway-systemd)
- [sway](https://github.com/swaywm/sway)
- [Presentation by Martin Pitt](https://people.debian.org/~mpitt/systemd.conf-2016-graphical-session.pdf)
